---
jupytext:
  text_representation:
    extension: .md
    format_name: myst
    format_version: 0.13
    jupytext_version: 1.10.3
kernelspec:
  display_name: Python 3 (ipykernel)
  language: python
  name: python3
---

# Measuring by 'Stars'


Author:     \
Time: 30-40 minutes\
Age group:	12 - 18\
Concepts:	

## Introduction
In this activity, you will simulate astronomical observations in the classroom by observing with light bulbs. The goal is to make students understand how to obtain temperature information from stars in a relatively simple way. In some cases, this also leads to information about the luminosity of a star and thus to distance information. They can determine this with some help, which requires a lot of back-and-forth thinking.

```{image} dm80_figure1.JPG
:width: 300px
:align: center
```
<center><i> Figure 1 - The two light bulbs photographed through a red filter held in front of the mobile phone camera. The inset shows the original color image.</i></center>


```{image} dm80_figure2.JPG
:width: 300px
:align: center
```
<center><i> Figure 2 - The two light bulbs photographed through a red filter held in front of the mobile phone camera. The inset shows the original color image.</i></center>


## Equipment
Two identical light bulbs that you can operate at different voltages, for example, using a dimmer; a set of simple red filters and a set of blue filters; smartphones.
Note: in astronomy, a filter is named after the wavelength it transmits. So, a red filter allows red light to pass through and absorbs other wavelengths. This is different from photography.

## Preparation
You prepare a number of identical light bulbs in advance as 'stars'. Make sure to vary their brightness by operating the bulbs at different voltages. The images use light bulbs from an optical rail, which provide 30 W at 6 V. One bulb is set at 6 V, the other at 4 V. The light bulbs must be identical because the surface area of the filament must be the same. Position the bulbs in such a way that they appear equally bright from the back of the classroom. You can also use a long corridor or hallway for the setup. Dim lighting enhances the atmosphere but is not necessary.

## Procedure
Introduce the bulbs as the 'stars' that the students will measure and from which they will qualitatively determine temperature and distance. You can emphasize that this initially seems very easy because you immediately see which one burns brighter and bluer and therefore has a higher temperature. All environmental information also immediately reveals which bulb is closer; after all, you can simply see that. Therefore, the students will perform these determinations with the information an astronomer has when observing: black and white photos showing only the bulbs; they are not allowed to use any information about the surroundings (tables, walls, etc.) visible in the photos. What they can use are a set of color filters and their own smartphone camera (set to black and white if possible). The assignment then becomes: 'Determine which of these bulbs has the highest temperature and which one is closest using your mobile phone camera and the color filters without using environmental information.' It is worth having the students think and discuss with each other first to figure out what they can do before they are allowed to grab filters.

The solution of which photos to take is simple; however, setting up a complete reasoning is significantly more difficult. You need to photograph both bulbs once through a red filter and once through a blue filter with exactly the same settings. The answer to the questions about temperature and distance follows from smartly comparing these images. During the debriefing, you can ask probing questions so that the student has to think back and forth firmly, thus learning to interpret observations using Wien's Displacement Law and Stefan-Boltzmann Law. To support this reasoning, you can show a diagram of spectra from black bodies. This helps to extract the temperature from the observations and also helps to emphasize again that an object (star) with a higher temperature emits more power in all wavelength ranges.

## Physics background
The lamp with the highest temperature will emit shorter wavelengths (Wien's Displacement Law) and therefore will be brightest in the blue filter (in the images, this is the right lamp), while there will be little or no difference in the red filter. It follows that the relatively bluest lamp has the highest temperature. Because a higher temperature leads to higher emitted power (Stefan-Boltzmann Law) and both lamps appear approximately equally bright, the lamp with the highest temperature is the farthest away. In the images above, the left lamp is therefore at the smallest distance. This last step can only be taken if you know that the surface area of the filament is the same, which is a correct assumption for identical light bulbs. However, this comparison is not valid for real stars, so the analogy breaks down, an aspect to emphasize during the debriefing.

This reasoning involves various back-and-forth thinking steps to connect observations to conclusions. There is a double comparison: in one of the two filters, there should be no (or very little) difference between the stars (in the images above, this is the red filter), and in the other filter, there should be a clear difference visible. Only then can you say something about the color and thus the temperature. If the same bulb is brighter in both filters, unfortunately, you cannot say anything meaningful without resorting to quantitative measurements (which astronomers can do perfectly). The step towards distance requires a subtle comparison as well because it is essential here too that both bulbs appear approximately equally bright.

In astronomy, blue and green filters are usually used for color information. However, with the green filters available to the author, the difference is too small.

## Tips
Unfortunately, this activity does not work with every mobile phone. Some cameras seem to adjust too much on their own and do not keep the settings constant. Setting it to fully manual mode, increasing the ISO value, and closing the aperture sometimes prove to be a solution. Having students work together in groups can reduce the problem.
If it can be done quickly, you can put one of the photo pairs from a student on the projector for the debriefing. In any case, make sure to have two usable photos yourself!

## References
```{bibliography}
Wikipedia provides information about the relationship between color index and temperature: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Color_index
```